# Developer Notes

## Supported Platforms

This code should work equivalently on MacOS, Linux, and Windows.

## Packaging and Dependencies

This project uses [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) to manage Python packaging and dependencies.  Most day-to-day tasks (such as running unit tests from the command line) are orchestrated through Poetry.

A coding standard is enforced using [Black](https://pypi.org/project/black/), [isort](https://pypi.org/project/isort/) and [Pylint](https://pypi.org/project/pylint/).  Python 3 type hinting is validated using [MyPy](https://pypi.org/project/mypy/).

## Pre-Commit Hooks

We rely on pre-commit hooks to ensure that the code is properly-formatted,
clean, and type-safe when it's checked in.  The `run install` step described
below installs the project pre-commit hooks into your repository.  These hooks
are configured in [`.pre-commit-config.yaml`](.pre-commit-config.yaml).

If necessary, you can temporarily disable a hook using Git's `--no-verify`
switch.  However, keep in mind that the CI build on GitHub enforces these
checks, so the build will fail.

## Line Endings

The [`.gitattributes`](.gitattributes) file controls line endings for the files
in this repository.  It would be simplest to have files in the Git working copy
use native line endings.  However, I develop this code on multiple platforms,
and the files in the published PyPI package get the line endings from the
working copy.  If we use native line endings, the format of the published
package will vary depending on where the publish step was run.  This is
confusing, and can cause problems for downstream users who expect the PyPI
package to have a consistent format.  Instead of relying on automatic behavior,
the `.gitattributes` file forces most files to have UNIX line endings.

This generally works ok, except for the [`docs/requirements.txt`](docs/requirements.txt) file 
generated by Poetry.  Unfortunately, all of the files that Poetry generates
have native platform line endings, and you can't override that behavior.  Even
with sane configuration in `.gitattributes`, you sometimes still get spurious
differences, where Git says that a file has changed but then `git diff` shows
an empty result.  The `run` script and the pre-commit hooks both normalize the
line endings for `requirements.txt`.  I wish there were a standard way to do
this in Poetry or in Python, but there isn't as of this writing.

## Prerequisites

Nearly all prerequisites are managed by Poetry.  All you need to do is make
sure that you have a working Python 3 enviroment and install Poetry itself.

### Poetry Version

The project is designed to work with Poetry >= 1.2.0.  If you already have an older
version of Poetry installed on your system, uninstall it before following the setup
process below:

```
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/python-poetry/poetry/master/get-poetry.py | python3 - --uninstall
```

See the [Announcing Poetry 1.2.0](https://python-poetry.org/blog/announcing-poetry-1.2.0/)
blog post for more information.

### MacOS

On MacOS, it's easiest to use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) to install Python:

```
brew install python3
```

Once that's done, make sure the `python` on your `$PATH` is Python 3 from
Homebrew (in `/usr/local`), rather than the standard Python 2 that comes with
MacOS.

Although Poetry can also be installed from Homebrew, it works better to use
to [official installer](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installing-with-the-official-installer):

```
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

> _Note:_ The installer prints the location of the installed `poetry` script.
> Make sure to add this to your `$PATH`, otherwise you won't be able to run it.

### Debian

First, install Python 3 and related tools:

```
sudo apt-get install python3 python3-venv python3-pip
```

Next, make sure that the `python` interpreter on your `$PATH` is Python 3.

If you are using Debian _bullseye_ or later (first released in August 2021),
then Python 2 is deprecated and Python 3 is the primary Python on your system.
However, by default there is only a `python3` interpreter on your `$PATH`, not
a `python` interpreter.  To add the `python` interpreter, use:

```
sudo apt-get install python-is-python3
```

For earlier releases of Debian where both Python 2 and Python 3 are available,
the process is a little more complicated.  The approach I used before upgrading
to _bullseye_ was based on `update-alternatives`, as discussed on
[StackExchange](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/410851).

Next, install Poetry using the [official installer](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installing-with-the-official-installer):

```
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

> _Note:_ The installer prints the location of the installed `poetry` script.
> Make sure to add this to your `$PATH`, otherwise you won't be able to run it.

### Windows

First, install Python 3 from your preferred source, either a standard
installer or a meta-installer like Chocolatey.  Make sure the `python`
on your `$PATH` is Python 3.

Next, install Poetry using the [official installer](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installing-with-the-official-installer):

```
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python -
```

> _Note:_ The installer prints the location of the installed `poetry` script.
> Make sure to add this to your `$PATH`, otherwise you won't be able to run it.

The development environment (the `run` script, etc.) expects a bash shell
to be available.  On Windows, it works fine with the standard Git Bash.

## Developer Tasks

The [`run`](run) script provides shortcuts for common developer tasks:

```
$ ./run --help

------------------------------------
Shortcuts for common developer tasks
------------------------------------

Basic tasks:

- run install: Setup the virtualenv via Poetry and install pre-commit hooks
- run format: Run the code formatters
- run checks: Run the code checkers
- run build: Build artifacts in the dist/ directory
- run test: Run the unit tests
- run test -c: Run the unit tests with coverage
- run test -ch: Run the unit tests with coverage and open the HTML report
- run suite: Run the complete test suite, as for the GitHub Actions CI build

Additional tasks:

- run docs: Build the Sphinx documentation for readthedocs.io
- run docs -o: Build the Sphinx documentation and open in a browser
- run publish: Publish the current code to PyPI and push to GitHub
- run release: Release a specific version and tag the code
- run requirements: Regenerate the docs/requirements.txt file
```

## Integration with PyCharm

Currently, I use [PyCharm Community Edition](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download) as
my day-to-day IDE.  By integrating Black and Pylint, most everything important
that can be done from a shell environment can also be done right in PyCharm.

PyCharm offers a good developer experience.  However, the underlying configuration
on disk mixes together project policy (i.e. preferences about which test runner to
use) with system-specific settings (such as the name and version of the active Python
interpreter). This makes it impossible to commit complete PyCharm configuration
to the Git repository.  Instead, the repository contains partial configuration, and
there are instructions below about how to manually configure the remaining items.

### Prerequisites

Before going any further, make sure sure that you have installed all of the system
prerequisites discussed above.  Then, make sure your environment is in working
order.  In particular, if you do not run the install step, there will be no
virtualenv for PyCharm to use:

```
./run install && ./run suite
```

### Open the Project

Once you have a working shell development environment, **Open** (do not
**Import**) the `uci-parse` directory in PyCharm, then follow the remaining
instructions below.  By using **Open**, the existing `.idea` directory will be
retained and all of the existing settings will be used.

### Interpreter

As a security precaution, PyCharm does not trust any virtual environment
installed within the repository, such as the Poetry `.venv` directory. In the
status bar on the bottom right, PyCharm will report _No interpreter_.  Click
on this error and select **Add Interpreter**.  In the resulting dialog, click
**Ok** to accept the selected environment, which should be the Poetry virtual
environment.

### Project Structure

Go to the PyCharm settings and find the `uci-parse` project.  Under 
**Project Structure**, mark both `src` and `tests` as source folders.  In 
the **Exclude Files** box, enter the following: 

```
LICENSE;NOTICE;PyPI.md;.coverage;.coveragerc;.github;.gitignore;.gitattributes;.htmlcov;.idea;.isort.cfg;.mypy.ini;.mypy_cache;.pre-commit-config.yaml;.pylintrc;.pytest_cache;.readthedocs.yml;.tabignore;build;dist;docs/_build;out;poetry.lock;poetry.toml;run;.run;.venv;
```

When you're done, click **Ok**.  Then, go to the gear icon in the project panel
and uncheck **Show Excluded Files**.  This will hide the files and directories
in the list above.

### Tool Preferences

In the PyCharm settings, go to **Editor > Inspections** and be sure that the
**Project Default** profile is selected.

Unit tests are written using [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/),
and API documentation is written
using [Google Style Python Docstring](https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example_google.html).  However,
neither of these is the default in PyCharm.  In the PyCharm settings, go to
**Tools > Python Integrated Tools**.  Under **Testing > Default test runner**,
select _pytest_.  Under **Docstrings > Docstring format**, select _Google_.

### Running Unit Tests

Right click on the `tests` folder in the project explorer and choose **Run
'pytest in tests'**.  Make sure that all of the tests pass.  If you see a slightly
different option (i.e. for "Unittest" instead of "pytest") then you probably
skipped the preferences setup discussed above.  You may need to remove the
run configuration before PyCharm will find the right test suite.

### External Tools

Optionally, you might want to set up external tools for some of common
developer tasks: code reformatting and the PyLint and MyPy checks.  One nice
advantage of doing this is that you can configure an output filter, which makes
the Pylint and MyPy errors clickable.  To set up external tools, go to PyCharm
settings and find **Tools > External Tools**.  Add the tools as described
below.

#### Linux or MacOS

On Linux or MacOS, you can set up the external tools to invoke the `run` script
directly.

##### Shell Environment

For this to work, it's important that tools like `poetry` are on the system
path used by PyCharm.  On Linux, depending on how you start PyCharm, your
normal shell environment may or may not be inherited.  For instance, I had to
adjust the target of my LXDE desktop shortcut to be the script below, which
sources my profile before running the `pycharm.sh` shell script:

```sh
#!/bin/bash
source ~/.bash_profile
/opt/local/lib/pycharm/pycharm-community-2020.3.2/bin/pycharm.sh
```

##### Format Code

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Format Code`|
|Description|`Run the code formatters`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`format`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Checked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Unchecked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Unchecked_|
|Output filters|_Empty_|

##### Run MyPy Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run MyPy Checks`|
|Description|`Run the MyPy code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`mypy`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN$:.*`|

##### Run Pylint Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run Pylint Checks`|
|Description|`Run the Pylint code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`pylint`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN.*`|

#### Windows

On Windows, PyCharm has problems invoking the `run` script.  The trick is to
invoke the Bash interpreter and tell it to invoke the `run` script.  The
examples below assume that you have installed Git Bash in its standard location
under `C:\Program Files\Git`.  If it is somewhere else on your system, just
change the path for `bash.exe`.

##### Format Code

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Format Code`|
|Description|`Run the code formatters`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`& 'C:\Program Files\Git\bin\bash.exe' "./run" format | Out-String`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Checked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Unchecked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Unchecked_|
|Output filters|_Empty_|

##### Run MyPy Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run MyPy Checks`|
|Description|`Run the MyPy code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`& 'C:\Program Files\Git\bin\bash.exe' "./run" mypy | Out-String`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN$:.*`|

##### Run Pylint Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run Pylint Checks`|
|Description|`Run the Pylint code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`& 'C:\Program Files\Git\bin\bash.exe' "./run" pylint | Out-String`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN.*`|

## Release Process

### Documentation

Documentation at [Read the Docs](https://uci-parse.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
is generated via a GitHub hook each time code is pushed to master.  So, there
is no formal release process for the documentation.

### Code

Code is released to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/uciparse/).  There is a
partially-automated process to publish a new release.

> _Note:_ In order to publish code, you must must have push permissions to the
> GitHub repo and be a collaborator on the PyPI project.  Before running this
> process for the first time, you must set up a PyPI API token and configure
> Poetry to use it.  (See notes below.)

Ensure that you are on the `master` branch.  Releases must always be done from
`master`.

Ensure that the `Changelog` is up-to-date and reflects all of the changes that
will be published.  The top line must show your version as unreleased:

```
Version 0.1.29     unreleased
```

Run the release step:

```
./run release 0.1.29
```

This updates `pyproject.toml` and the `Changelog` to reflect the released
version, then commits those changes and tags the code.  Nothing has been pushed
or published yet, so you can always remove the tag (i.e. `git tag -d v0.1.29`)
and revert your commit (`git reset HEAD~1`) if you made a mistake.

Finally, publish the release:

```
./run publish
```

This builds the deployment artifacts, publishes the artifacts to PyPI, and
pushes the repo to GitHub.  The code will be available on PyPI for others to
use after a little while.

### Configuring the PyPI API Token

In order to publish to PyPI, you must configure Poetry to use a PyPI API token.  Once
you have the token, you will configure Poetry to use it.  Poetry relies on
the Python keyring to store this secret.  On MacOS and Windows, it will use the
system keyring, and no other setup is required.  If you are using Debian, the
process is more complicated.  See the notes below.

First, in your PyPI [account settings](https://pypi.org/manage/account/),
create an API token with upload permissions for the uciparse project.
Once you have a working keyring, configure Poetry following
the [instructions](https://python-poetry.org/docs/repositories/#configuring-credentials):

```
poetry config pypi-token.pypi <the PyPI token>
```

Note that this leaves your actual secret in the command-line history, so make sure
to scrub it once you're done.

### Python Keyring on Debian

On Debian, the process really only works from an X session.  There is a way to
manipulate the keyring without being in an X session, and I used to document it
here. However, it's so ugly that I don't want to encourage anyone to use it.  If
you want to dig in on your own, see the [keyring documentation](https://pypi.org/project/keyring/)
under the section **Using Keyring on headless Linux systems**.

Some setup is required to initialize the keyring in your Debian system. First,
install the `gnome-keyring` package, and then log out:

```
$ sudo apt-get install gnome-keyring
$ exit
```

Log back in and initialize your keyring by setting and then removing a dummy
value:

```
$ keyring set testvalue "user"
Password for 'user' in 'testvalue':
Please enter password for encrypted keyring:

$ keyring get testvalue "user"
Please enter password for encrypted keyring:
password

$ keyring del testvalue "user"
Deleting password for 'user' in 'testvalue':
```

At this point, the keyring should be fully functional and it should be ready
for use with Poetry.  Whenever Poetry needs to read a secret from the keyring,
you'll get a popup window where you need to enter the keyring password.
